


Version 1.1                                                   N. Soriano
                                                           MSX community
                                                        February 3, 2010


  MSX-UNAPI: Unified procedure for API definition and discovery on MSX
                               computers

Abstract

   This document describes MSX-UNAPI, a standard procedure for defining,
   discovering and using new APIs (Application Program Interfaces) for
   MSX computers.  The goal is to provide a unified way to design and
   use BIOS-like software for the various kinds of new hardware that is
   being developed for these computers, altough it can be used for
   software-only solutions as well.



































Soriano                                                         [Page 1]

                                MSX-UNAPI                  February 2010


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1.  Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.2.  Goals  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.3.  Non-goals  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     1.4.  Glossary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     1.5.  Sample scenario  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   2.  API specification rules  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     2.1.  Rule 1: The API identifier and version number  . . . . . .  8
     2.2.  Rule 2: One single entry point on Z80 page 1 or 3  . . . .  8
     2.3.  Rule 3: Z80 registers usage  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     2.4.  Rule 4: Routine number ranges  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     2.5.  Rule 5: The API information routine + the
           implementation name and version  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     2.6.  Rule 6: Implement code for the API discovery procedure . . 11
     2.7.  Rule 7: Install the RAM helper . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     2.8.  Rule 8: Avoid segment number #FF . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     2.9.  Optional rule 9: Give your routines a meaningful name  . . 12
   3.  API implementations discovery procedure  . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     3.1.  The MSX extended BIOS  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     3.2.  Steps of the discovery procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     3.3.  How to implement support for the discovery procedure . . . 15
   4.  The RAM helper . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
     4.1.  Notes on the routine for calling a routine with inline
           routine identification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
   5.  Specificationless UNAPI applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
   Appendix A.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
   Appendix B.  Document version history  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21





















Soriano                                                         [Page 2]

                                MSX-UNAPI                  February 2010


1.  Introduction

1.1.  Motivation

   MSX was presented in 1983 as a standard for home computers, in the
   form of a set of specifications to be followed by manufacturers.  Any
   brand was able to make its own model of computer; as long as the
   machine met the MSX standard, it was considered an MSX computer.
   This allowed for flawless interoperation between computers of
   different makers, something not as common at the time as it is
   nowadays.

   An important part of the MSX specification was the BIOS, a set of
   routines that -amongst other things- provided a standarized way to
   access the harwdare resources of the machine.  This provided certain
   degree of freedom to manufacturers, which could -to some extent-
   freely choose the hardware parts that would build up their given
   model of MSX computer.

   Time passed and the MSX standard was discontinued by all
   manufacturers long time ago.  However, many people still using their
   old MSX computers, and some of them even develop new hardware for
   these machines.  Hard disk interfaces, sound cards and network cards
   are examples of hardware that has been developed for MSX computers
   past the commercial live of the standard.

   Altough the appearance of new hardware is of course a good thing,
   this causes a problem for software developers.  Not having any
   authority dictating specifications for the MSX standard anymore, each
   hardware developer freely choses the way their hardware will have to
   be accessed from software; in other words, there are no
   specifications to follow at the time of designing the API
   (Application Program Interface) for the new harwdare.  As a result,
   hardware extensions performing the same functions but being developed
   by different persons are software-incompatible (unless developers
   privately agree on using compatible APIs, which is not always
   possible).

   The intent of this document is to propose a solution for this
   problem: a standard, unified procedure for defining, discovering and
   using new APIs for MSX computers, aimed especially (but not
   exclusively) to the hardware development field.

1.2.  Goals

   The main goals of this specification are:





Soriano                                                         [Page 3]

                                MSX-UNAPI                  February 2010


   o  To provide a minimum set of rules to be followed by APIs that
      adhere to this specification.  These rules are to be taken in
      account when designing (and later implementing) the various APIs.
      They are very simple, impose only a few restrictions on compliant
      code, and in practice allow any kind of API software to be
      written.

   o  To provide a standard procedure for discovering and using APIs
      that adhere to this standard and are installed on the MSX computer
      running the UNAPI aware software.  This procedure is based on the
      MSX extended BIOS mechanism, and is very easy to implement and
      even easier to use.

1.3.  Non-goals

   It is NOT the intent of this specification, and/or is outside the
   scope of this document:

   o  To impose the described specification to developers or users.
      Altough the authors hope that the MSX-UNAPI specification will be
      useful for the MSX community, this document is merely a proposal,
      and adhering to it is of course optional.

   o  To arbiter who should desing the APIs.  Common sense suggests that
      APIs should be designed by the first person or team that develops
      a given type of hardware (or software), but the decision of such
      thing is outside the scope of this document.

   o  To describe any API other than for illustration purposes.  This
      documents just tells a procedure for designing APIs; these must be
      described in sepparate documents.

1.4.  Glossary

   Before proceeding any further, a glossary of terms used along this
   document will be introduced.  It will be useful to understand the
   rules and procedures described later.

   MSX-UNAPI
      Short for "MSX unified API definition and discovery standard".  A
      set of rules to be followed when designing and implementing APIs,
      aimed mainly (but not exclusively) to hardware developers; and a
      procedure for discovering any such APIs available to application
      software.

   API specification





Soriano                                                         [Page 4]

                                MSX-UNAPI                  February 2010


      API stands for "Application Program Interface".  The description
      of a set of routines that perform some action (which usually, but
      not necessarily, involve accessing some kind of hardware),
      including the precise description of input and output parameters,
      as well as the side effects caused by the execution of each
      routine.

   UNAPI compliant API specification
      An API specification that conforms to the rules for API
      specifications described in this document.

   API specification identifier
      An alphanumeric, case-insensitive string made of up to 15
      characters, which uniquely identifies an UNAPI compliant API
      specification.  For example the identifier of an API specification
      for Ethernet cards could be "ETHERNET".  See Section 2.1 for more
      details.

   The XXXXX UNAPI specification
      The specification for an UNAPI compliant API whose specification
      identifier is XXXXX.  For example, "the Ethernet UNAPI
      specification".

   XXXXX UNAPI compliant API implementation
      Real code that builds up a set of routines which conforms to an
      UNAPI compliant API specification (and more precisely, to the
      XXXXX UNAPI specification).  There may be several implementations
      of one single specification, each made by a different person or
      team; but if they strictly conform to the API specification, they
      are indistinguishable with respect to usage and behavior.

   API implementation name
      An alphanumeric string made of up to 63 characters, which uniquely
      identifies an API implementation.  For example the name of an
      implementation of the Ethernet UNAPI could be "ObsoNET", while the
      name of other implementation could be "UltraNET Supercard".  See
      Section 2.5 for more details.

   XXXXX UNAPI client software
      Application software that invokes the routines of an XXXXX UNAPI
      compliant API implementation.  For example, a TCP/IP stack could
      act as client software of the Ethernet UNAPI.  The client software
      must use the discovery procedure (see Section 3) to locate the
      available API implementations, and usually it does not matter
      which one is used if more than one is found.

   Specificationless UNAPI application




Soriano                                                         [Page 5]

                                MSX-UNAPI                  February 2010


      Application software (typically, a resident application) that does
      not conform to any concrete UNAPI specification, but that make use
      of the remaining of the UNAPI infrastructure, namely, the
      implementation and discovery rules.  See Section 5 for more
      details.

   #FF
      Character # is used in this document as a prefix for hexadecimal
      numbers, so for example #FF is 255.

   Through this document, and unless otherwise stated, the term "API
   specification" will actually have the meaning of "UNAPI compliant API
   specification".  The same applies to references to API
   implementations.

1.5.  Sample scenario

   This section provides an fictional scenary that briefly shows the
   steps that are needed in order to design and implement UNAPI
   compliant APIs.  The goal is to provide the reader a basic
   understanding about how all the whole thing works, so that it is
   easier to read the detailed rules and procedures that are provided in
   the remaining of the document.

   Suppose that a user named H.G. Wells builds a time machine for MSX
   computers.  He wants to make the software to control it to be UNAPI
   compliant.  To achieve this, since it is the first time machine ever
   developed for MSX, he first must design the API specification.  These
   are the steps he follows for it:

   1.  Chooses a short name for the API specification.  He chooses
       "TIME_MACHINE". (see Section 2.1)

   2.  Designs the routines that will compose the API.  He designs three
       routines: travel backwards, travel forwards, and return to
       original time.  These routines will have routine numbers 1
       through 3. (see Section 2.2, Section 2.3 and Section 2.4)

   Now he must write a real implementation of the API, to be included in
   ROM together with the time-travel hardware.  He does then the
   following:

   1.  Chooses a name for the API implementation: "Well's Time Machine
       BIOS" (see Section 2.5)

   2.  Implements the actual code for the three API routines (again, see
       Section 2.2, Section 2.3 and Section 2.4)




Soriano                                                         [Page 6]

                                MSX-UNAPI                  February 2010


   3.  Implements the API discovery procedure, so that when the time
       machine is present in a MSX machine, it can be discovered by
       using extended BIOS (see Section 3)

   The device turns out to sell quite well in MSX users meetings, and
   some users develop software that uses it, from multi-epoch games to
   virtual history books.  All of this software uses the UNAPI discovery
   procedure (see Section 3) in order to find out at run time whether
   the time machine is present or not.

   Soon afterwards, another user with hardware design knowledge, Dr.
   Brown, develops another kind of time machine for MSX.  Since he wants
   the software that already exists for Well's hardware to be compatible
   with his own device, he develops the software so that it is
   compatible with the TIME_MACHINE API specification, by following the
   same steps that Wells did.  There are, however, some important
   differences with the Well's machine:

   1.  The API implementation name is now "Brown's flux-capacited time
       machine".

   2.  The device is connected to MSX via serial port, so it has no ROM
       and the API implementation is therefore installed in mapped RAM.
       When this API is installed, it installs the RAM helper. (see
       Section 4)

   3.  There is an extra routine which is needed to calibrate the flux
       capacitor.  This routine is implemented as an implementation-
       specific routine (see Section 2.4), and has the routine number
       128.

   Now that there are two different time travel devices around, an user
   named M. McFly wants to develop a windowed graphic interface to
   control the time machines.  It develops the software to discover, and
   interact with, TIME_MACHINE APIs; therefore it works with both kinds
   of devices.  Moreover, as an extra feature, it checks the
   implementation name of the API implementation it uses (see
   Section 2.1), and when it is the Brown's implementation, the
   application offers extra functionality to calibrate the flux
   capacitor.


2.  API specification rules

   This section describes the rules that must follow any UNAPI compliant
   API specification, as well as their implementations.





Soriano                                                         [Page 7]

                                MSX-UNAPI                  February 2010


2.1.  Rule 1: The API identifier and version number

   An API specification must have an alphanumeric identifier composed of
   up to 15 characters.  Allowed characters are letters (having an ASCII
   code below 128), digits, and the following ones: - _ / . ( )

   The API identifier is case-insensitive, so for example, "ETHERNET" is
   the same as "Ethernet".

   An API specification must have a version number composed of main
   version number in the range 1-255, and secondary version number in
   the range 0-255.  Specifications with higher version numbers must be
   backwards compatible with older versions.  The first released
   specification document should have version 1.0.  Versions 0.x are
   allowed as pre-releases, with no guarantee of backwards compatibility
   between them.

   Digits may be used in the identifier when they are meaningful to
   describe the API (for example "WIFI_IEEE802.3"), but they must NOT be
   used to indicate the specification version.

2.2.  Rule 2: One single entry point on Z80 page 1 or 3

   There must be one single entry point for the API routines.  This
   entry point must be accessible in any address on one of these places:

   o  A ROM or non-mapped RAM slot, on Z80 page 1 (address between #4000
      and #7FFF).

   o  A mapped RAM segment, provided that it will be connected to Z80
      page 1 (address between #4000 and #7FFF) when called.

   o  System RAM on page 3 (address above #C000).

   It is outside the scope of this specification to define how RAM
   memory (mapped RAM segments and space in system RAM on page 3) is
   allocated.

   If necessary, API routines may return a pointer to hard-coded
   information to be read by the client software (as the mandatory API
   information routine does with the API implementation name, see
   Section 2.5).  In this case, the information must be in the same
   place as the API implementation itself.  That is, in the same ROM
   slot (in Z80 page 1), in the same RAM segment (if this is the case, a
   page 1 address is returned), or in system RAM on page 3.  This way it
   is easy to obtain the name by using inter-slot or inter-segment (see
   Section 4) reads.




Soriano                                                         [Page 8]

                                MSX-UNAPI                  February 2010


   As an exception to the above rule, API implementations residing in
   page 1 (ROM or a mapped RAM segment) may return an address in system
   RAM on page 3 (this is useful when ROM implementations need to return
   dynamic data, for example).  Therefore the client software must be
   always prepared to either perform inter-slot or inter-segment reads,
   or direct memory reads, in order to retrieve the data.

   If necessary, API routines may require the client software to specify
   a buffer where dynamic data will be read from, or written to (for
   example, packets to be sent to or retrieved from the network in the
   case of an Ethernet API).  In this case, the API specification may
   impose a restriction to the client software, so that it must NOT
   specify any page 1 address as the buffer address.

2.3.  Rule 3: Z80 registers usage

   Z80 registers are used by the API routines in the following way:

   o  Register A is used at input to specify the routine to be executed.
      Each routine has associated a number in the range 0-254; how these
      numbers are allocated is described in Section 2.4.  It can be used
      also as an output parameter, otherwise it is corrupted after the
      routine is executed.

   o  Registers F, BC, DE and HL may be used freely as input and/our
      output parameters.  Registers not used to hold output parameters
      are corrupted after the routine is executed, unless otherwise
      stated in the routine definition.

   o  Registers IX, IY must not be used for input parameters, to allow
      for inter-slot and inter-segment calls.  They can be used as
      output parameters, otherwise they are corrupted after the routine
      is executed.

   o  Alternate registers (AF', BC', DE' and HL') are corrupted after
      the routine is executed.

   "The registers are corrupted after the routine is executed" means
   that the routine code may freely make internal use of the registers,
   and it does not need to restore their original values before
   finishing.

2.4.  Rule 4: Routine number ranges

   As stated before, each API routine has associated a number which must
   be passed in register A when calling the API entry point.  The
   numeric range 0-255 is divided in four ranges of routines:




Soriano                                                         [Page 9]

                                MSX-UNAPI                  February 2010


   o  0: This value corresponds to the API information routine.  It is a
      mandatory routine that must be present on all implementations of
      any UNAPI compliant API.  The parameters and behavior of this
      routine are described in Section 2.5.

   o  1-127: Specification routines.  The behavior of these routines is
      defined in the appropriate API specification document.

   o  128-254: Implementation-specific routines.  API implementation
      developers may freely use this range of routines to offer
      additional capabilities not present in the original API
      specification; if this is done, these routines must be described
      in the documentation of the implementation.  For example, one
      implementation of the Ethernet UNAPI could use this range of
      routines to offer WiFi connectivity, while other could offer basic
      internetworking capability.  Note that different implementations
      may use the same numbers for different routines, always inside
      this range.

   o  255: This value is reserved for a possible future extension
      mechanism.

   Numbers must be assigned to routines in increasing order, starting
   with 1 for specification routines and starting with 128 for
   implementation-specific routines; it is not allowed to leave holes in
   the function number ranges.  If client software invokes a non-
   existing routine (that is, calls the API implementation entry point
   passing in A a number not assigned to any routine), nothing must
   happen and the code must return with AF, BC, DE and HL unmodified.

2.5.  Rule 5: The API information routine + the implementation name and
      version

   Every API implementation, no matter which API specification is
   implementing, must mandatorily implement the API information routine.
   This routine has always the routine number 0 and has the following
   input and output parameters:

Input:  A = 0
Output: HL = Address of the implementation name string
        DE = API specification version supported. D=primary, E=secondary.
        BC = API implementation version. B=primary, C=secondary.

   The implementation name string must be composed of up to 63 printable
   characters and must have a zero byte as termination.  The name may be
   any descriptive text, but must NOT contain any version information,
   and is case-sensitive.




Soriano                                                        [Page 10]

                                MSX-UNAPI                  February 2010


   The implementation name must be placed in the same place as the API
   implementation itself (see Section 2.2).

   Usually, client software will use the first suitable API
   implementation it founds, and will use the implementation name merely
   to show information to the user.  However, if the client software is
   able to use the implementation-specific features of any given
   implementation, it must check the implementation name to know wether
   the desired implementation-specific routines are available or not.

   Client software should check the API specification version supported
   by the implementation, since newer implementation versions may have
   routines not available in older versions.

   Rules for the implementation version are similar to rules for the
   specification version (see Section 2.1): first release version should
   be 1.0, and 0.x versions are allowed for pre-releases.  However, the
   backwards compatibility rule now applies to implementation-specific
   routines only, since the compatibility with the specification
   routines is indicated by the "API specification version supported"
   parameter.

   It is not allowed for an API implementation to go backwards in the
   API specification version supported when the API implementation
   version is increased.  For example, if implementation version 2.0
   supports specification version 1.5, it is illegal for implementation
   version 2.1 to claim compliance with the specification version 1.4;
   it must support specification version 1.5 or higher.  Otherwise,
   backwards compatibility between API implementations could not be
   assured.

2.6.  Rule 6: Implement code for the API discovery procedure

   Every API implementation, no matter which API specification is
   implementing, must mandatorily support the API discovery procedure.
   See Section 3.

2.7.  Rule 7: Install the RAM helper

   Every API implementation that is installed on a mapped RAM segment
   must, at installation time, check if the RAM helper is installed.  If
   not, it must either install one, or refuse to install.  See
   Section 4.

2.8.  Rule 8: Avoid segment number #FF

   An API implementation that installs on a mapped RAM segment must NOT
   be installed on a segment whose number is #FF (this is the last



Soriano                                                        [Page 11]

                                MSX-UNAPI                  February 2010


   existing segment number on 4MByte RAM slots).  This is necessary
   because the discovery procedure will use #FF as a fictitious segment
   number when the API implementation resides in ROM (see Section 3.2).

   When using the mapper support routines provided by MSX-DOS 2 to
   allocate memory, this is not an issue, since these routines will
   never allocate segment #FF even when it is available.  However, when
   running under DOS 1 and manually selecting the segment for
   installation, care must be taken to not use segment #FF.

2.9.  Optional rule 9: Give your routines a meaningful name

   In your API specification, you can refer to your ruotines simply by
   their numbers.  However, to make the client software developers life
   easier, it is advisable to give your routines meaningful names.
   Tipically, these names will be directly used as constants in source
   code; therefore, the following guidelines should be followed when
   choosing the names:

   o  Use characters that are legal for all assemblers and compilers.
      Ideally, you should use only letters and the underscore symbol
      ("_").  Use uppercase letters to improve readability.

   o  Limit the length of the names to a reasonable maximum, for example
      16 characters.

   o  Do not use names already in use for standard MSX BIOS routines,
      system work area variables or MSX-DOS function calls.

   o  It may be useful to prepend the routine names with the first
      characters of the implementation identifier.

   o  And of course, choose names that make sense for the routines being
      named.

   For example, an Ethernet UNAPI specification could have the following
   routine names: ETH_RESET (reset hardware), ETH_GET_FRAME (retrieve
   incoming frame from the network), or ETH_GET_NETSTAT (check the
   network status).

   Note that this rule is optional, and so are the guidelines listed;
   you can break them if necessary, simply be wise and think on the
   other developers.


3.  API implementations discovery procedure

   Section 2 described the rules for designing UNAPI compliant APIs.



Soriano                                                        [Page 12]

                                MSX-UNAPI                  February 2010


   These API specifications are used by developers to make API
   implementations, which are composed of real code that once installed
   on an MSX computer (whatever the installation method is), becomes
   available to client software.

   This section describes the API implementations discovery procedure,
   that is, the steps that client software must follow to find out how
   many implementations of a given API specification are available at
   run time, and to gather information about each implementation (in
   which slot/segment are placed, where the entry point is, and the name
   and version information), as well as how API implementations can
   include support for this procedure.

3.1.  The MSX extended BIOS

   The discovery procedure is based on the MSX extended BIOS, which is a
   mechanism available on MSX computers that allows standard BIOS to be
   extended with new routines.  This section explains the general rules
   of the extended BIOS mechanism, and later sections explain how this
   is used for the UNAPI discovery protocol.

   Extended BIOS provides a five byte hook named EXTBIO at address
   #FFCA.  To check whether this hook has been initialized with any
   value or is uninitialized, look at bit 0 of the byte at address
   HOKVLD (#FB20).  A value of one for this bit means that the hook
   contains a valid jump instruction, previously set by system code or
   user code.

   The EXTBIO hook contents may be replaced with a jump instruction to
   custom code, provided that the old hook contents are saved somewhere.
   If the hook is not initialized, it should first be filled with five
   RET instructions, and bit 0 of HOKVLD should be set; from this point,
   consider it as being initialized.

   The EXTBIO hook is called with a code named "device identifier" in
   register D, a "function identifier" in register E, and input
   parameters in AF, BC and HL.  The code called in this way must look
   at the device identifier to check if the request is for itself.  If
   not, it must jump to the old hook (the one saved at installation
   time) with AF, BC, DE and HL unmodified.

   When the device identifier matches the one expected by the code, it
   performs the action requested (as per the function identifier) and
   either returns parameters in, or corrupts, AF, BC and HL; DE is
   always preserved.

   IX, IY and the alternate registers are always corrupted, no matter
   whether any suitable code for the specified device identifier is



Soriano                                                        [Page 13]

                                MSX-UNAPI                  February 2010


   executed or not.

   This procedure allows to chain together multiple BIOS extensions,
   each having its own device identifier.  These identifiers were once
   assigned by MSX manufacurers, and later on, users have developed
   software that patch extended BIOS, freely choosing their own
   identifiers.

3.2.  Steps of the discovery procedure

   Client software willing to discover how many implementations of a
   certain API are available at run time must perform these steps:

   1.  Copy the API specification identifier to address #F847.  Append a
       zero byte as string terminator.

   2.  Set Z80 registers as follows: A=0, B=0, DE=#2222.

   3.  Call the EXTBIO hook.

   4.  When EXTBIO returns, B contains the number of installed
       implementations of the specified API.  DE is preserved and AF, C,
       HL are corrupted.

   Address #F847 is a 16 byte buffer named ARG, used normally by Math-
   Pack (mathematic routines package of MSX BIOS).

   After the previous steps have been performed, and provided that at
   least one implementation is installed (B>0), do the following to
   gather information about a given implementation:

   1.  Make sure that the API specification identifier is still at ARG.

   2.  Set Z80 registers as follows: A=implementation index (from 1 to
       the number of available implementations), DE=#2222.

   3.  Call the EXTBIO hook.

   4.  When EXTBIO returns, Z80 registers contain the following
       information about the specified implementation:

          A = Slot where the implementation code is placed
          B = RAM segment where the implementation code is placed
             (#FF if not in mapped RAM)
          HL = Routines entry point address
             (if a page 3 address, A and B are meaningless)





Soriano                                                        [Page 14]

                                MSX-UNAPI                  February 2010


          DE is preserved.  F and C are corrupted.

   With this information, now you know how to call the implementation
   entry point in order to invoke the API routines:

   o  If the entry point address is a page 3 address, ignore A and B and
      perform direct calls to that address.

   o  Otherwise, if B=#FF, use inter-slot calls (for example by using
      the BIOS routine CALSLT) to invoke the routines.

   o  Otherwise, use inter-segment calls (you can use the RAM helper for
      this, see Section 4) to invoke the routines.

   Usually, the first thing to do at this point is to call the API
   implementation information routine (see Section 2.5) to obtain the
   implementation name and version (this is not mandatory, though).
   From here, client software can invoke the API routines as needed.

3.3.  How to implement support for the discovery procedure

   Section 3.2 provided a functional description of the API
   implementations discovery procedure.  For this procedure to work, all
   implementations of an UNAPI compliant API must include code to
   support this procedure.  This section explains how this code should
   be implemented.

   First, when the API implementation is installed (or at system boot,
   for ROM based code), the existing EXTBIO hook must be backed up (if
   EXTBIO hook is not initialized, initialize it first as explained in
   Section 3.1).  Then, put a jump instruction or an inter-slot or
   inter-segment call pointing to your EXTBIO manager code.

   Second, include in the API implementation code to manage EXTBIO calls
   (that's where the new EXTBIO hook points to).  This code must perform
   the following steps:

   1.  Check that register pair DE holds the value #2222.  If not, jump
       to the old EXTBIO hook with AF, BC, DE, HL unmodified.

   2.  If A=#FF, jump to the old EXTBIO hook with AF, BC, DE, HL
       unmodified (this is to allow the RAM helper to be installed, see
       Section 4).

   3.  Check that the string placed in ARG (remember that it is zero-
       terminated there) matches the identifier of the API specification
       that your code implements.  If not, jump to the old EXTBIO hook
       with AF, BC, DE, HL unmodified.  Remember that the strings



Soriano                                                        [Page 15]

                                MSX-UNAPI                  February 2010


       comparison must be done in a case-insensitive way.

   4.  If A=0, increase the value of register B by one, and jump to the
       old EXTBIO hook with A and DE unmodified.

   5.  Otherwise, if A=1, put the appropriate information about the
       implementation in registers A, B, and HL, as described in
       Section 3.2, and return (do NOT call the old EXTBIO hook) with DE
       unmodified.

   6.  Otherwise, decrease A by one, and jump to the old EXTBIO hook
       with DE unmodified.

   Note that given the way the discovery procedure is designed, the
   implementations installed in the first place have assigned the
   highest implementation index numbers.  Usually this has no impact on
   the design on client software but it is a good thing to know it.


4.  The RAM helper

   Once an API implementation has been discovered, it is easy for client
   software to invoke the API routines if the API entry point is located
   at page 3 (using direct calls) or in a ROM slot (using inter-slot
   calls, for example via the BIOS function CALSLT).  However, for API
   implementations installed in a mapped RAM segment, it is not so easy
   to invoke the API entry point.  MSX-DOS 2 provides system routines to
   execute code placed on an arbitrary segment, but the client code must
   still ensure that the appropriate RAM slot is switched on page 1.
   For MSX-DOS 1 it is even worse, since no mapper support routines are
   provided.

   To solve this issue, and in order to ease the development of client
   software, this specification includes the concept of the RAM helper.
   The RAM helper consists of a set of routines and a mappers table that
   are placed at system RAM on page 3, each having an entry point in the
   same area.  Two of the routines allow to easily perform inter-segment
   calls, while the other allows to perform inter-segment data reads.

   To check for the presence of the RAM helper, and to obtain the
   address of its routines, EXTBIO must be called with DE=#2222, HL=0,
   and A=#FF.  If the RAM helper is not installed, then HL=0 at output;
   otherwise the following register values will be returned:

      HL = Address of a jump table in page 3
      BC = Address of a mappers table in page 3





Soriano                                                        [Page 16]

                                MSX-UNAPI                  February 2010


      A = Number of entries in the jump table

   The value returned in A is always 3 as per this specification.  This
   value is provided because future specification versions may define
   additional routines, and so client applications may detect which
   specification version the installed RAM helper conforms to.

   The jump table routines are as follow:

      +0: Call a routine in a mapped RAM segment
         Input:
            IYh = Slot number
            IYl = Segment number
            IX = Target routine address (must be a page 1 address)
            AF, BC, DE, HL = Parameters for the target routine
         Output:
            AF, BC, DE, HL, IX, IY = Parameters returned from the target
            routine

      +3: Read a byte from a RAM segment
         Input:
            A = Slot number
            B = Segment number
            HL = Address to be read from
               (higher two bits will be ignored)
         Output:
            A = Data readed from the specified address
            F, BC, DE, HL, IX, IY preserved

      +6: Call a routine in a mapped RAM segment, with inline routine
      identification
         Input:
            AF, BC, DE, HL = Parameters for the target routine
         Output:
            AF, BC, DE, HL, IX, IY = Parameters returned from the target
            routine
         The routine is to be called as follows:
            CALL CALLSEG

            CALLSEG:
            CALL <routine address>
            DB &Bmmeeeeee
            DB <segment number>
            ;no RET is needed here

         where





Soriano                                                        [Page 17]

                                MSX-UNAPI                  February 2010


            mm is the mapper slot, as an index (0 to 3) in the mappers
            table

            eeeeee is the routine to be called, as an index (0 to 63) of
            a jump table that starts at address #4000 of the segment.
            That is, 0 means #4000, 1 means #4003, 2 means #4006, etc.

   The mappers table is as follows:

      +0: Slot number of the primary mapper
      +1: Maximum segment number of the primary mapper
      +2: Slot number of second mapper
      +3: Maximum segment number of the secondary mapper
      ...

   The table contains from one to four entries depending on how many
   mappers are present in the system.  For each mapper, an entry exists
   containing the slot number and the maximum available segment number
   (this will be #FE for 4MB mappers, since segment #FF can't be used,
   see Section 2.8).  The end of the table is always indicated by a zero
   byte (even if all four entries are filled).

   This table is needed when using the routine that calls a routine in a
   mapped RAM segment with inline routine identification: the slot
   number is specified as an index in this table (from 0 for the first
   entry, up to 3 for the fourth entry).  The maximum available segment
   number is provided to help RAM based implementations to decide in
   which segment should they be installed; normally they should provide
   the user the option to decide which segment to use, and default to
   use the maximum segment number available of one of the available
   mappers if the user does not provide any segment number.  (Note that
   this applies when running under MSX-DOS 1 only, since MSX-DOS 2
   provides its own set of mapper support routines)

   The installation code for every API implementation that is to be
   installed on a mapped RAM segment must check if the RAM helper is
   installed in the system (by using the procedure based on a EXTBIO
   call described above).  If not, the implementation installer has two
   options: either install a RAM helper by itslef, appropriately
   patching the EXTBIO hook so that the RAM helper can be discovered by
   using the explained procedure; or refuse to install, thus requiring
   the user to previously install a RAM helper in order to install that
   implementation.  This way, client applications can always safely
   assume that the RAM helper is installed if implementations that
   reside in mapped RAM are installed.

   How page 3 RAM is allocated in order to install the RAM helper is
   outside the scope of this specification.



Soriano                                                        [Page 18]

                                MSX-UNAPI                  February 2010


   Having a RAM helper installed is mandatory when installing API
   implementations which reside in mapped RAM, but using it is optional;
   client software may choose to use its own code for calling the API
   routines and reading the API data.  However, it is recommended to use
   the RAM helper since it significantly reduces the complexity of
   client software.

4.1.  Notes on the routine for calling a routine with inline routine
      identification

   The routine for calling a routine with inline routine identification
   is intended for helping in the process of patching hooks (mainly the
   EXTBIO hook) to implementations that do not otherwise need to
   allocate or modify RAM on page 3.  If the implementation has the code
   for the discovery procedure available at an entry that belongs to a
   jump table that starts at address #4000 (the start of the segment
   where it resides), and saves the previous state of the hook in the
   segment itself, then it is enough to set up the contents of the hook
   with the five bytes of code needed to call the routine (one CALL and
   two DB).  No further action is required on page 3 at install time.

   Note that a double indirection is needed here: a CALL is made to a
   memory location which in turn contains a CALL to the real routine.
   The implementation of this routine must increase the stack pointer by
   two, so that execution resumes at the address placed after the first
   call, ignoring whatever is placed after the two DB directives.  It is
   necessary to implement it this way, in order to be able to place a
   call to this routine in the EXTBIO hook, which is just five bytes
   long.


5.  Specificationless UNAPI applications

   The UNAPI specification is primarily intended for the development of
   software that conforms to a given UNAPI compliant API specification.
   However, the infrastructure offered by UNAPI for the implementation
   and discovery of API implementations may be useful as well to develop
   normal applications that do not follow any standard, but still need
   to offer services to and be discoverable by the user (typically,
   TSRs, Terminate and Stay Resident programs).

   For this reason, the concept of specificationless UNAPI applications
   is introduced.  Such applications are identical to regular UNAPI
   implementations, except for the following:

   1.  The API identifier is an empty string.  That is, when performing
       the discovery procedure (see Section 3), a single zero byte must
       be placed by client software in ARG, and this is what the



Soriano                                                        [Page 19]

                                MSX-UNAPI                  February 2010


       specificationless application discovery code must search for.
       The application is then identified exclusively by the
       implementation name, which becomes the application name.

   2.  There is no concept of Specification routines vs Implementation-
       specific routines as defined in Section 2.4.  Instead, the whole
       range of function numbers 1-254 are implementation-specific
       routines, that is, the specificationless application may define
       these routines as desired (or define no routines at all).  Note
       however that the API information routine (see Section 2.5) is
       still mandatory, and that function number 255 is still reserved.

   3.  Since specificationless application do not conform to any API
       specification, the API specification version number provided by
       the API information routine (see Section 2.5) does not make
       sense.  This routine should return this value as Version 0.0
       (that is, DE=0).

   Apart from these differences, the whole set of rules enumerated in
   this document still apply, including the discovery procdedure and the
   rules that refer to routine registers usage.

   Specificationless applications will tipically take the form of TSRs
   that install on RAM, but this is not mandatory and ROM
   specificationless applications are allowed as well.


Appendix A.  Acknowledgements

   This document was produced using xml2rfc v1.34 (of
   http://xml.resource.org/) from a source in RFC-2629 XML format.


Appendix B.  Document version history

   o  Version 0.2
      *  Added the "The big picture" section (Section 1.5)

   o  Version 0.3
      *  "The big picture" section (Section 1.5) has been renamed to
         "Sample scenario"
      *  Added the routine to call address #4010 in the "The RAM helper"
         section (Section 4)

   o  Version 0.4
      *  The maximum length for implementation names has been changed
         from 64 to 63 characters (Section 1.4 and Section 2.5), so a
         full length name will be 64 bytes long including the zero



Soriano                                                        [Page 20]

                                MSX-UNAPI                  February 2010


         termination byte.
      *  Slightly modified the explanation of the discovery procedure to
         make more clear (sort of) the fact that the API identifier must
         be zero-terminated only when it is copied to ARG (that is, the
         zero byte is NOT part of the identifier itself).  See
         Section 3.2 and Section 3.3.
      *  Added information about the alternate registers usage in
         Section 2.3.
      *  Added the "avoid segment #FF" rule (see Section 2.8).
      *  The usage of "#" as hexadecimal prefix is now noted in the
         glossary (see Section 1.4).

   o  Version 1.0
      *  Added the rule about routine names (see Section 2.9).

   o  Version 1.1
      *  Added the concept of specificationless applications (see
         Section 5).
      *  Modified the RAM helper specification (see Section 4) so that:
         +  Installing the RAM helper when it is not installed is now
            optional (RAM based implementation installers may refuse to
            install instead).
         +  When invoking the EXTBIO hook with A=#FF, additional
            information is returned in registers A and DE.
         +  The routine for invoking a routine in the segment address
            #4010 has been replaced by a routine for invoking a routine
            in a jump table of up to 64 entries.
         +  A mappers table is now generated in addition to the jump
            table.


Author's Address

   Nestor Soriano
   MSX community

   Email: konamiman@konamiman.com
   URI:   http://www.konamiman.com













Soriano                                                        [Page 21]


