--- NestorMIF - NestorBASIC extension for MIF format decompression ---
--- By Konami Man, 12-1999 ---


1. WHAT IS THIS?

You don't know yet the MIF graphic format? It was created by Noldas and it 
enables you to compress any SCREEN 5, 6, 7, 8, 11 or 12 image with a good 
compression ratio, especially when the image is interlaced.

NestorMIF is an extension for NestorBASIC which enables you to decompress any 
MIF image to VRAM. Like all NestorBASIC extensions, it is used via the 
"execute machine code routine stored in a segment" function (function number 
59). NestorMIF itself contains three subfunctions: getting information about 
screen parameters of a MIF image, restoring the palette of a MIF image, and 
decompressing a MIF image.


2. HOW TO USE?

The procedure for decompressing a MIF image using NestorMIF can be summarized 
in the following way:

- First load the NestorBASIC run-time patch NBPATCH.BIN, next load 
NestorBASIC itself. Don't forget the patch!
- Load NestorMIF, file NMIF.BIN, in the address 0 of any RAM segment. Note 
that loading address must be 0, else NestorMIF will not work!
- Load the MIF file in any address of any RAM segment. If there is not enough 
room in one segment to load the whole file, you must load it using 
consecutive segments. Refer to NestorBASIC manual, or better look at 
the supplied NestorMIF sample BASIC program for details about how to load 
files across consecutive segments. Note that VRAM segments are not supported 
by NestorMIF.
- Set the appropriate screen parameters (screen mode, interlaced or not, and 
border colour) for the image. If you don't know these parameters a priori, 
use NestorMIF subfunction 1 to get it. If the image is interlaced, do a SET 
PAGE 1 to display it correctly.
- Restore the image palette using subfunction 2, unless you are sure that the 
image is SCREEN 8 or 12.
- Finally, decompress the image to VRAM using subfunction 3.

Please take a look at the supplied example program NMIFSAM.BAS, it follows 
all the mentioned steps with detail. The source for NestorPreTer, 
NMIFSAM.ASM, is also supplied.


3. SUBFUNCTIONS AND PARAMETERS

Once NestorMIF is loaded, the general way to call it is as follows:

	p(0)= Segment where NestorMIF is loaded
	p(1)= Address where NestorMIF is loaded (must be 0!!)
	p(2)= Subfunction number
	p(3) to p(11): Depends on the subfunction
	e=usr(59)

The output parameters are also subfunction dependant; p(2) will contain value 
-1 if any subfunction number different from 1, 2 or 3 was specified, else it 
will remain unchanged.

Subfunctions parameters and working are as follows:


*** Getting information about a MIF image

Input:	p(2)= 1
	p(3)= Segment where the MIF file is stored
	p(4)= Address of p(3) where the MIF file is stored
	p(5)= Color number to get information about (0-15)

Output: p(3)=-1 if the segment specified in p(3) don't exists,
		else unchanged
	p(6)= Screen mode
	p(7)= -1 if it is an interlaced image, else 0
	p(8)= Border colour for the image
	p(9)= Value of Red for the color specified in p(5)
	p(10)=Value of Green for the color specified in p(5)
	p(11)=Value of Blue for the color specified in p(5)

Note: if the screen is 8 or 12 (so it has no palette), or if an invalid 
colour code (greater than 15) was specified in p(5), p(9) to p(11) will have 
output value -1.


*** Restoring the palette of a MIF image

Input:	p(2)= 2
	p(3)= Segment where the MIF file is stored
	p(4)= Address of p(3) where the MIF file is stored

Output: p(3)=-1 if the segment specified in p(3) don't exists,
		else unchanged

This function restores the palette of the MIF image, as the COLOR=RESTORE 
instruction does with the normal images. If the image screen mode is 8 or 12 
(so it has no palette), this subfunction does just nothing, and no error is 
generated.

Note that palette data is not only sent to VDP registers, but also copied in 
VRAM, in the appropriate palette address depending on the graphic mode. So if 
you want to save the palette in a separate file, just use this function and 
next do

bsave "PALETTE.SCx", address, address+31, S

where the address is #7680 for SCREEN 5 and 6, and #FA80 for SCREEN 7 and 11.
Then it is enough to do a further bload"PALETTE.SCx",S: COLOR=RESTORE to 
restore the palette alone, without having to load the MIF file.


*** Decompressing a MIF image

Input:	p(2)= 3
	p(3)= Segment where the MIF file is stored
	p(4)= Address of p(3) where the MIF file is stored
	p(5)= Destination VRAM 64K block (0 or 1)
	      (only if the image is not interlaced)
	p(6)= Destination VRAM address
	      (only if the image is not interlaced)

Output: P(7)= 0 if success
	     -1 if the specified segment don't exists
	     -2 if NestorMIF runs out of segments while decompressing
		(that is, the last address of the last segment is reached
		but the end of the compreesed data was not reached yet)
	     -3 if the specified VRAM address don't exists
		(that is, VRAM block 1 was specified but the computer has
		only 64K of VRAM capacity)

Note that when the image is interlaced, input parameters p(5) and p(6) are 
ignored, and the image is always decompressed to the begin of the VRAM (block 
0, address 0).

WARNING: NestorMIF itself is only 1.5K long, but when executing subfunction 3 
it uses the remaining space on the segment where it is stored as a temporary 
compressed data buffer. Therefore, don't use the NestorMIF segment to store 
also any other data or programs, or you will lose it!


4. USEFUL NOTES

- Watch the available memory, it determines the maximum size of the MIF file 
you can decompress. In a 128K computer under DOS 1, you can't decompress MIF 
files bigger than 32K. In a 128K computer under DOS 2, you just can't use 
NestorMIF. Error -2 when decompressing normally means a lack of memory.

- If you have a Turbo-R with external memory expansion, try to load NestorMIF 
in a segment of the internal mapper instead of using the external one; 
otherwise NestorMIF will be very slow when decompressing. To almost ensure 
that the internal mapper is used, take the lowest possible segment number for 
NestorMIF (the best option is to use segment 5, or segment 6 if you use any 
NestorBASIC moonblaster replayer).

- Remember to do a SET PAGE 1 if the image is interlaced, else it is not 
displayed correctly.

- Setting screen and interlaced mode is easy in normal BASIC mode, it is 
enough to do the following after executing subfunction 1:

	screen p(6),,,,,-p(7)

However, inside of a turbo-block it is a little more difficult, because 
TurboBASIC don't supports interlaced switch in the SCREEN function, and 
besides you can't set any graphic mode higher than 8. Then, the way to set 
screen parameters from inside of a turbo-block is as follows (a previous 
subfunction 1 execution is assumed):

	'Set graphic mode
	if p(6)<9 then screen p(6) else
	if p(6)=11 then screen 8: vdp(26)= vdp(26) or 24 else
	if p(6)=12 then screen 8: vdp(26)= vdp(26) or 8

	'Set interlaced
	if p(7) then vdp(10)= vdp(10) or 12

- In the original MIF viewer program, color 0 has the transparent function 
disabled. To obtain the same effect from (turbo)BASIC, just do the following:

	vdp(9)= vdp(9) or 32

- Also, it may be useful to disable sprites. Do the following for this:

	vdp(9)= vdp(9) or 2

and for enabling again,

	vdp(9)= vdp(9) and 253
